README.md, before:

# fresh-logging

[Access Log](https://www.w3.org/Daemon/User/Config/Logging.html#common-logfile-format) [middleware](https://fresh.deno.dev/docs/concepts/middleware) for
[Deno Fresh](https://fresh.deno.dev/).

## Installation

First of all, create [your fresh app](https://fresh.deno.dev/docs/getting-started/create-a-project).

Add logging to your `import_map.json`.

```json
{
  "imports": {
    "$logging/": "https://deno.land/x/fresh_logging@1.0.1/"
  }
}
```

Consume the logger in your app's `_middleware.ts`.

```ts
import * as getLogger from "$logging/index.ts";
// or
// import { getLogger, ... } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger(),
  // ... other middlewares
];
```

**Note**: if `includeDuration` option is ON (which is the default behavior), `getLogger()` will also count the time taken by all of its subsequent middlewares.
For example, putting `getLogger()` at the beginning of your `handler` array will count the time taken by all middlewares, while putting it at the very end of
your `handler` array will yield the time taken only by the route handler.

## Options

`getLogger()` accepts an optional object `{}` with the following options:

| Option            | Default Value                | Notes                                                                                                                                                   |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `format`          | `LoggingFormat.DEFAULT`      | Default format to use, v0.0.1 only supports [Common Log Format](https://www.w3.org/Daemon/User/Config/Logging.html#common-logfile-format).              |
| `utcTime`         | `false`                      | Whether to log timestamps in UTC or server timezone.                                                                                                    |
| `includeDuration` | `true`                       | Whether to include handler response time.                                                                                                               |
| `resolvers`       | `{}`                         | Selectively supply customer resolvers for the missing fields. See the next section on [limitations](#limitations) for more details.                     |
| `logger`          | `console.info` +color -level | Optionally supply a custom logger function of type `(message: string) => string`. See the [logger section](#how-to-use-custom-logger) for more details. |

## Limitations

As of v0.0.1, the following fields are **completely** omitted (hard-coded to `-`):

- `rfc931` (client identifier): not sure how to obtain this
- `authuser` (user identifier): not sure how to obtain this either
- `bytes` (response content length): one way I can think of is to use `res.clone()` then read its as `ArrayBuffer` and get the `byteLength`, but that is both
  time and memory consuming. Until I can find a more efficient way to obtain this piece of information, omission is the decision.

From v0.0.2, a `resolvers` option has been added to allow custom resolutions of all the fields, including the missing ones above. For example, the following
code snippet will allow logging the response bytes:

```ts
import { getLogger, ResolutionField } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger({
    resolvers: {
      [ResolutionField.bytes]: async (_req, _ctx, res) => `${(await res.clone().arrayBuffer()).byteLength}`,
    },
  }),
];
```

Again, please note that the example above only serves to illustrate how to provide customer resolvers for the missing fields, the actual implementation is
sub-optimal. Otherwise, it would have been included as default resolver for that field.

## How to use custom logger

Simply provide a function with the signature `(message: string) => string`, such as:

```ts
import { getLogger } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger({
    logger: (message: string) => {
      console.debug(message);
      return message;
    },
  }),
];
```

In combination with a sophisticated logging solution such as https://github.com/onjara/optic, most logging use cases (console/stdout, rotating file, cloud,
etc.) can be implemented with relative ease.

## Add support for [Apache Combined Log Format](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/logs.html#:~:text=%25B%20instead.-,Combined%20Log%20Format,-Another%20commonly%20used)

Use `LoggingFormat.APACHE_COMBINED` like this:

```ts
import { getLogger, LoggingFormat } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger({
    format: LoggingFormat.APACHE_COMBINED,
  }),
];
```

The default two headers included are "Referer" and "User-agent". In future releases, this might be customizable.

## A note about versioning

For now, the versions are `a.b.c-x.y.z` where `a.b.c` is the plugin version and `x.y.z` is the supported Turnstile API version. For example, `0.0.1-0` is the
initial release of plugin, which supports Turnstile API v0.

All tags starting with `0.0.` are **mutable**. Expect breaking changes! Starting from `0.1.`, tags will be **immutable**. However, still expect breaking
changes. Starting from `1.`, semver will kick in and there will be no breaking changes until `2.`.

Commit message:

feat: make combinedHeaders an option

README.md, after:

# fresh-logging

[Access Log](https://www.w3.org/Daemon/User/Config/Logging.html#common-logfile-format) [middleware](https://fresh.deno.dev/docs/concepts/middleware) for
[Deno Fresh](https://fresh.deno.dev/).

## Installation

First of all, create [your fresh app](https://fresh.deno.dev/docs/getting-started/create-a-project).

Add logging to your `import_map.json`.

```json
{
  "imports": {
    "$logging/": "https://deno.land/x/fresh_logging@1.0.1/"
  }
}
```

Consume the logger in your app's `_middleware.ts`.

```ts
import * as getLogger from "$logging/index.ts";
// or
// import { getLogger, ... } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger(),
  // ... other middlewares
];
```

**Note**: if `includeDuration` option is ON (which is the default behavior), `getLogger()` will also count the time taken by all of its subsequent middlewares.
For example, putting `getLogger()` at the beginning of your `handler` array will count the time taken by all middlewares, while putting it at the very end of
your `handler` array will yield the time taken only by the route handler.

## Options

`getLogger()` accepts an optional object `{}` with the following options:

| Option            | Default Value                | Notes                                                                                                                                                   |
| ----------------- | ---------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `format`          | `LoggingFormat.DEFAULT`      | Default format to use, v0.0.1 only supports [Common Log Format](https://www.w3.org/Daemon/User/Config/Logging.html#common-logfile-format).              |
| `utcTime`         | `false`                      | Whether to log timestamps in UTC or server timezone.                                                                                                    |
| `includeDuration` | `true`                       | Whether to include handler response time.                                                                                                               |
| `resolvers`       | `{}`                         | Selectively supply customer resolvers for the missing fields. See the next section on [limitations](#limitations) for more details.                     |
| `logger`          | `console.info` +color -level | Optionally supply a custom logger function of type `(message: string) => string`. See the [logger section](#how-to-use-custom-logger) for more details. |

## Limitations

As of v0.0.1, the following fields are **completely** omitted (hard-coded to `-`):

- `rfc931` (client identifier): not sure how to obtain this
- `authuser` (user identifier): not sure how to obtain this either
- `bytes` (response content length): one way I can think of is to use `res.clone()` then read its as `ArrayBuffer` and get the `byteLength`, but that is both
  time and memory consuming. Until I can find a more efficient way to obtain this piece of information, omission is the decision.

From v0.0.2, a `resolvers` option has been added to allow custom resolutions of all the fields, including the missing ones above. For example, the following
code snippet will allow logging the response bytes:

```ts
import { getLogger, ResolutionField } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger({
    resolvers: {
      [ResolutionField.bytes]: async (_req, _ctx, res) => `${(await res.clone().arrayBuffer()).byteLength}`,
    },
  }),
];
```

Again, please note that the example above only serves to illustrate how to provide customer resolvers for the missing fields, the actual implementation is
sub-optimal. Otherwise, it would have been included as default resolver for that field.

## How to use custom logger

Simply provide a function with the signature `(message: string) => string`, such as:

```ts
import { getLogger } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger({
    logger: (message: string) => {
      console.debug(message);
      return message;
    },
  }),
];
```

In combination with a sophisticated logging solution such as https://github.com/onjara/optic, most logging use cases (console/stdout, rotating file, cloud,
etc.) can be implemented with relative ease.

## Add support for [Apache Combined Log Format](https://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.4/logs.html#:~:text=%25B%20instead.-,Combined%20Log%20Format,-Another%20commonly%20used)

Provide the `format` option with `LoggingFormat.APACHE_COMBINED` like this:

```ts
import { getLogger, LoggingFormat } from "$logging/index.ts";

export const handler = [
  getLogger({
    format: LoggingFormat.APACHE_COMBINED,
  }),
];
```

The default two headers included are "Referer" and "User-agent". You can override that by optionally providing the `combinedHeaders` option, which expects a
string array of length 2.

## A note about versioning

For now, the versions are `a.b.c-x.y.z` where `a.b.c` is the plugin version and `x.y.z` is the supported Turnstile API version. For example, `0.0.1-0` is the
initial release of plugin, which supports Turnstile API v0.

All tags starting with `0.0.` are **mutable**. Expect breaking changes! Starting from `0.1.`, tags will be **immutable**. However, still expect breaking
changes. Starting from `1.`, semver will kick in and there will be no breaking changes until `2.`.
